README.md, before:

Simple flask based RESTful API
==============================

This application is a basic RESTful API created with Python, Flask and Postgres that provides stateless user authentication.

You can access and play around with the API at <https://simpleuserauth-api.herokuapp.com/>

Personal note: I've been wanting to explore building a basic API without the help of a REST framework and so used this as an opportunity to do just that.  Flask is an extremely lightweight application framework and it made the most sense to use it.

Local Development
-----------------

To run on your local machine, you need the following prerequisites:

* Postgres server
* Python
* Pip
* Virtualenv

The following enviornment variables must be defined on your local machine:

    export APP_SETTINGS="config.DevelopmentConfig"
    export DATABASE_URL="postgresql://localhost/userauth_api_dev"

Once you are ready, do the following to install:

    $ virtualenv venv
    $ source venv/bin/activate
    (venv) $ pip install -r requirements.txt

To run the local development server:

    $ python app.py

API Documentation
-----------------

- POST **/api/user/register**

    Registers a new user.

    Requires a JSON object with the following payload:

    ```
    {
        "email": <email address>,
        "password": <password>,
        "name": <name>
    }
    ```
    The _name_ parameter is optional.

    Notes:
    - The password is hashed before it is stored in the database. Once hashed, the original password is discarded.
    - In a production deployment secure HTTP must be used to protect the password in transit.

- GET **/api/token**

    Return an authentication token.<br>
    This request must be authenticated using a HTTP Basic Authentication header.<br>
    On success a JSON object is returned with a field `token` set to the authentication token.
    On failure status code 401 (unauthorized) is returned.

- GET **/api/user**

    This endpoint returns a json object with the email and name of the authenticated user.<br>
    This request must be authenticated using a HTTP Basic Authentication header. Instead of username and password, the client can provide a valid authentication token in the username field. If using an authentication token the password field is not used and can be set to any value.<br>
    On success a JSON object with data for the authenticated user is returned.<br>
    On failure status code 401 (unauthorized) is returned.

- PATCH **/api/user**

    Updates a user record<br>

    You can use this endpoint to change either the user name or password of the user.  This requires a JSON object with the following payload:

    Requires a JSON object with the following payload:

    ```
    {
        "name": <name>
        "password": <password>,
    }
    ```
    This request must be authenticated using a HTTP Basic Authentication header. Instead of username and password, the client can provide a valid authentication token in the username field. If using an authentication token the password field is not used and can be set to any value.<br>
    On success status code 200 (OK) is returned.<br>
    On failure status code 401 (unauthorized) is returned.

- DELETE **/api/user**

    Deletes the user that is currently authenticated<br>
    This request must be authenticated using a HTTP Basic Authentication header. Instead of username and password, the client can provide a valid authentication token in the username field. If using an authentication token the password field is not used and can be set to any value.<br>
    On success status code 200 (OK) is returned.<br>
    On failure status code 401 (unauthorized) is returned.

Commit message:

Updated token endpoint to login

README.md, after:

Simple flask based RESTful API
==============================

This application is a basic RESTful API created with Python, Flask and Postgres that provides stateless user authentication.

You can access and play around with the API at <https://simpleuserauth-api.herokuapp.com/>

Personal note: I've been wanting to explore building a basic API without the help of a REST framework and so used this as an opportunity to do just that.  Flask is an extremely lightweight application framework and it made the most sense to use it.

Architecture
------------

This is an example of a simple, stateless token based user authentication API.  When a user creates an account, once they login they are provided with an authorization token that has a built in expiration date.  The user would then use this token to authenticate against protected resources. Once their token expires they will have to login again.


Local Development
-----------------

To run on your local machine, you need the following prerequisites:

* Postgres server
* Python
* Pip
* Virtualenv

The following enviornment variables must be defined on your local machine:

    export APP_SETTINGS="config.DevelopmentConfig"
    export DATABASE_URL="postgresql://localhost/userauth_api_dev"

Once you are ready, do the following to install:

    $ virtualenv venv
    $ source venv/bin/activate
    (venv) $ pip install -r requirements.txt

To run the local development server:

    $ python app.py

API Documentation
-----------------

- POST **/api/user/register**

    Registers a new user.

    Requires a JSON object with the following payload:

    ```
    {
        "email": <email address>,
        "password": <password>,
        "name": <name>
    }
    ```
    The _name_ parameter is optional.

    Notes:
    - The password is hashed before it is stored in the database. Once hashed, the original password is discarded.
    - In a production deployment secure HTTP must be used to protect the password in transit.

- GET **/api/user/login**

    Return an authentication token.<br>
    This request must be authenticated using a HTTP Basic Authentication header.<br>
    On success a JSON object is returned with a field `token` set to the authentication token.
    On failure status code 401 (unauthorized) is returned.

    The user would then use this token to authenticate for protected resources.

- GET **/api/user**

    This endpoint returns a json object with the email and name of the authenticated user.<br>
    This request must be authenticated using a HTTP Basic Authentication header. Instead of username and password, the client can provide a valid authentication token in the username field. If using an authentication token the password field is not used and can be set to any value.<br>
    On success a JSON object with data for the authenticated user is returned.<br>
    On failure status code 401 (unauthorized) is returned.

- PATCH **/api/user**

    Updates a user record<br>

    You can use this endpoint to change either the user name or password of the user.  This requires a JSON object with the following payload:

    Requires a JSON object with the following payload:

    ```
    {
        "name": <name>
        "password": <password>,
    }
    ```
    This request must be authenticated using a HTTP Basic Authentication header. Instead of username and password, the client can provide a valid authentication token in the username field. If using an authentication token the password field is not used and can be set to any value.<br>
    On success status code 200 (OK) is returned.<br>
    On failure status code 401 (unauthorized) is returned.

- DELETE **/api/user**

    Deletes the user that is currently authenticated<br>
    This request must be authenticated using a HTTP Basic Authentication header. Instead of username and password, the client can provide a valid authentication token in the username field. If using an authentication token the password field is not used and can be set to any value.<br>
    On success status code 200 (OK) is returned.<br>
    On failure status code 401 (unauthorized) is returned.
